Candy Boatwright
Dissertation Prospectus
Dissertation Committee:
Dr. Brent Morris (Chair), Dr. Joshua Catalano,
Dr. Rod Andrew, Dr. Otis Pickett


“The Unionist South: The Persistence of Dissent in Antebellum South Carolina” (working title)
Project Overview
        Benjamin Franklin Robertson, Jr. was born in 1903 in Clemson, South Carolina. His father, the state chemist, had offices at Clemson Agricultural College so Ben, Jr. grew up roaming the grounds of John C. Calhoun’s family home at the heart of the campus. Graduating from Clemson Agricultural College in 1923, he proceeded to the University of Missouri to earn a degree in journalism. His career took him around the world and into the thick of World War II conflict. A year before his death in 1943 in a plane crash he published Red Hills and Cotton: An Upcountry Memory. Robertson captures the sentiments of his home region, writing,
“Our folds are old and settled in our country; we have a sense of continuity, of the infinite age of time - the history of the United States has been told to us in our valley by kinfolks who have been told it by their kinfolks, and it is a personal epic, a personal saga, and in it from the beginning we have been taking our part. We know why we were fearful of adopting the Federal Constitution - it took from us a part of our power; and we know why we opposed the Civil War in the hill country but fought it anyhow because we were Carolinians and Carolina was Carolina. ”
Two hundred years before Ben Robertson explained South Carolinians’ loyalty, John C. Calhoun shouted dire warnings to his constituents of the consequences should they not follow his states’ rights politics. “If we do not defend ourselves none will defend us; if we yield we will be more and more pressed as we recede; and if we submit we will be trampled under foot.”[1] He was fighting to bring unity to a region that was disinclined to view themselves as South Carolinians first and Americans second. Calhoun along with other states’ rights and disunion politicians spent thirty years molding a message to South Carolina. They must defend their homes, their way of life, and their peculiar institution for they were under attack by the federal government, the industrializing North, and the abolitionists. Deftly concealed in this protectionist rhetoric was the skewing of republican ideals and questioning of the democratic nature of the United States, allowing the planter class to include non-slave holding whites in their ideology.[2] There remained, however, a small group of Unionist elites who refused to be drawn into the states’ rights doctrine. 
Unionism in antebellum South Carolina reveals fully developed political differences among its citizens. The Nullification Crisis is the historical moment usually associated with Unionism. The constitutional arguments surfacing in favor of states’ rights and concurrent majority pull heavily on the planter class who for generations had feared their diminishing power in Washington, D.C. as their home state’s white population continued to dwindle. The long shadow of John C. Calhoun’s federal aspirations and regional loyalties overshadowed Revolutionary War ideals and allegiances. Unionism stood in the way of the domination of these ideologies for nearly half a century by arguing that disunion could not fulfill the goals of most South Carolinians. Only through remaining in the United States could South Carolina maintain its economic power within the world economy. Some Unionists argued that the surest protection for the system of slavery was to remain under the constitution which protected the peculiar institution. Almost unanimously, South Carolina Unionists saw that disunion or the dissolution of the Union meant the end of the republican experiment.
The legacy of the dissenting backcountry Regulators during the colonial years and eruption of civil war between South Carolinians through the Revolutionary years made internal unity a priority during the antebellum years.[3] The increasing number of enslaved black people mingled with the decreasing number of whites continually drawn west in search of cheap, unspent land created a palpable climate of fear. Only by keeping the white men of South Carolina bound to one another socially and politically could black revolts be thwarted, the north be kept from overpowering the south economically and politically, and the abolitionists be silenced.
John C. Calhoun and other members of the states’ rights slavocracy understood the need to have the support of South Carolina voters as well as broader support among the slave states even as they began to spread the gospel of states’ rights. Despite their insistence on unity within South Carolina as evidenced by the Test Oath instituted by the General Assembly as part of Ordinance of Nullification and the political dealmaking which occurred after the Nullification Crisis during John C. Calhoun’s bid for the vice presidency, the Union party persisted through the 1840s and 50s. By examining the individuals that led the Unionist party as well as the non-elites that either chose to remain or leave the state through the antebellum period and into the Civil War, I will interrogate the notion in the literature that South Carolina was a one-party state during the lead up to secession.
Joel Roberts Poinsett, James Louis Petigru and Benjamin Franklin Perry are well-known elite South Carolinians that continued to be outspokenly pro-Union despite the increasing pressure to conform to states’ rights ideology. Each of them contributes to understanding what it was to be a Unionist in South Carolina through their personal and public writing. There are many other Unionists supporters who have not left written records detailing and justifying their choice to resist the majority of their peers. Perhaps through uncovering more of their names and investigating how their Unionists politics impacted their social and economic lives a more complete picture of antebellum South Carolina can be reached.
While the elite white men of South Carolina largely, if not unanimously, chose to stay in South Carolina and join the Confederacy after secession, it remains unclear how Unionists from the lower and middle classes chose to respond to South Carolina’s secession. Sources exist which paint a picture of the Piedmont and mountain areas of South Carolina as areas which consistently failed to send their required numbers of conscripted soldiers and into which Confederate conscription officers refused to go for fear of their lives. Other sources relate incidents of Union soldiers being made aware of Confederate draft dodgers once South Carolina was occupied. But almost no scholarship exists to give more insight about these men and why they refused to submit to the Confederacy.
There are also people who made the decision to no longer remain within Confederate South Carolina. South Carolina was the only Confederate state which did not furnish the Union with at least one white military unit and most scholars accept that as evidence of the total support of its citizens and residents. However, sources do exist which show native South Carolina men enlisted in Union units and fighting against their home state. Far from the romanticized “brother against brother” notion of the Civil War perpetuated by reconciliationists, these men truly joined with strangers to fight their families and neighbors to regain the Union. 
Black South Carolinians choosing to resist secession often fled to the coast or other locations behind the Union army lines. They sought freedom but also acted in political defiance of secession. The First South Carolina Volunteer Infantry Regiment was organized near what is today Hilton Head on Port Royal and consisted of free and emancipated black men fighting for the Union. When considered as a totality, all of these groups supporting Unionism in South Carolina constitute a significant dissenting voice jeopardizing the political unity of the state. How significant is a major goal of the research of this dissertation.
Historiographical Context


Unionism in South Carolina is most often represented as a subplot to Nullification and Secession. Because the states’ rights movements eventually lead to Civil War and because the Unionist party and ideology is not successful in stopping South Carolina’s march toward disunion it is reasonable to expect that scholars focus on the individuals and forces that prevailed through the antebellum period. My aim is to uncover more about what caused the well-known Unionists to remain committed to Unionism and what sustained them through this period. 
        Biographies exist for each of the main subjects of my dissertation, some dating back to the mid-19th century. Petigru alone of the three has a recently released biography, William and Jane Pease’s James Louis Petigru: Southern Conservative, Southern Dissenter which was published in 1995 by the University of Georgia Press. Perry’s most recent biography is Lillian Kibler’s Benjamin F. Perry: South Carolina Unionist published by Duke University Press in 1946 and Fred Rippy’s Joel R. Poinsett: Versatile American was released in 1935 by Duke. All of the biographies will be helpful as political and social frameworks for my research, but I intend to show the broader impacts of Unionism in each of these men’s lives than the previous scholarship through building a better understanding of the people around them.
        Lacy K. Ford, Jr. examines the Upstate of South Carolina through an economic and political lens in The Origins of Southern Radicalism.[4] He follows the thread of Nullification through the economic crises of the 1840s and 50s to argue that support for secession in the Upcountry is rooted in defense of country republicanism. While certainly an important perspective, when examined against Stephen A. West’s “Minute Men, Yeomen, and the Mobilization for Secession in the South Carolina Upcountry” in which he uses muster roles and newspaper reports to demonstrate disinterest in secession in the Piedmont, even after the election of Abraham Lincoln, an opportunity for additional research and clarification presents itself.[5]
        The most in-depth handling of Unionism in South Carolina is by scholars examining its opponents: Nullification and Secession. William W. Freehling’s Prelude to Civil War, Richard E. Ellis’ The Union at Risk and John Barnwell’s Love of Order all contribute to understanding the political and economic climate that produced the Nullification Crisis in South Carolina in 1832-33.[6] More recently, Brian Neumann’s Bloody Flag of Anarchy examines the rhetoric employed by both Nullifiers and Unionists in their struggle to persuade South Carolinians to side for or against the federal government’s right to legislate and a state’s right to resist.[7] 
Methodology and Sources


This dissertation will take a socio-political approach to Unionism in antebellum and Civil War era South Carolina. Understanding the individuals and groups who chose to side with the minority party in a state where political unity was paramount will challenge traditional narratives of South Carolina and strengthen newer scholarship which pushes against consensus. The three elite South Carolinians highlighted in my dissertation all have scholarly biographies and extant paper and letter collections. These sources will be used in multiple ways: first, to build the digital components of my research in order to visualize the Unionist Network both socially and geographically; second, to find other Unionists who are less known and of different classes than Petigru, Perry and Poinsett; lastly, to try, when possible, to connect the lives of white and black Unionists.
The final group I will highlight in the dissertation are people who fled South Carolina after secession because of their Unionist beliefs. I intend to replicate research done by scholars on Unionists in other states to attempt to locate these people and trace their movements. An examination of the socio-cultural, class and geography of these individuals, as well as their families, will help to fill out my South Carolina Unionist Network database and visualizations as well as provide depth of understanding to a failed political party. I anticipate using primary sources such as census records and Confederate muster roles to piece together evidence regarding these people. Richard Current’s 98 native South Carolinians serving in the Union army under Alabama’s First Cavalry will be a starting point to identifying these and other men who served in the Union Army. I hope to use Current’s methods to locate other South Carolina Union men in other locations. This research will also include Confederate POWs who are persuaded to join the Union Army after capture.[8] 
Included in this group are African Americans who flee enslavement behind Union Army lines, which may or may not be within the state lines of South Carolina. Thankfully, there is secondary scholarship on free and enslaved political resistance through the antebellum period and into the Civil War; however, as with all research into non-elite groups, finding names and information about the individuals and their motives is often arduous. I anticipate finding a great deal of information about both white and black Unionists who left South Carolina in local and family collections around the Upstate. Because of the uncertainty of what primary sources exist, I plan to initially limit this search to the Upstate and possibly even only Greenville and Spartanburg Counties. Depending on what resources I am able to find and how long this process takes, I may then expand to other areas of the state.
Tentative Table of Contents


Introduction
Section 1: Unionists Who Remained
Chapter 1: Joel Roberts Poinsett
Chapter 2: James Louis Petigru
Chapter 3: Benjamin Franklin Perry
Chapter 4: Non-elites: Dissenters or Confederates?
Section 2: Unionists Who Left
Chapter 5: Blacks Behind Union Army Lines
Chapter 6: Whites Beyond South Carolina’s Borders
Epilogue
Chapter Summaries
Introduction
        The dissertation will open with an anecdote tying more modern South Carolinian sentiment about dissent to ideas of liberty and place. John C. Calhoun’s states’ rights and constitutional theories will be briefly discussed in order to ground the reader in the shifting political climate in which South Carolina Unionists found themselves. The introduction will also serve to position the dissertation in the historiographical context of South Carolina political antebellum literature. Brief chapter summaries will provide a brief overview of the individuals and groups to be examined throughout the work.
Chapter 1: Joel Roberts Poinsett
The dissertation will open with Joel Roberts Poinsett. Born in 1779 in Charleston, Poinsett was the son of a wealthy physician and Revolutionary War veteran. He spent his younger years traveling the globe and being educated at the highest academic levels as he explored various professions. Finally deciding on politics, he served as a “special agent” to several South American countries. Relocating back to the United States to serve in the South Carolina legislature as a representative from Charleston beginning in 1817 he strongly supported internal improvements. Elected to the U.S. Congress in 1820 he aligned with John C. Calhoun in opposition to the Tariff of 1824 and supported federally funded internal improvements and the building of a national army and navy.
        Appointed as a special envoy to Mexico in 1822 by President James Monroe, he remained there through the increasingly tumultuous border negotiations between the United States and Mexico, returning to South Carolina in 1830 partly to escape the increasingly dangerous environment and also to offer aid to the Union Party during the burgeoning Nullification Crisis. He traveled throughout the state staying in constant contact with other Unionists as well as President Andrew Jackson. He helped organize Unionists paramilitary groups to fight against the units being organized by the Nullifiers. 
        Joel Poinsett serves as a direct foil to John C. Calhoun who is featured in the introduction. Because both men served in the federal government and therefore spent a great deal of time away from South Carolina, their lives and loyalties are helpful to compare to one another. Calhoun died in 1850 and Poinsett in 1851, therefore neither can be tied directly to secession or the Confederacy. This allows me to position the remainder of the dissertation on a note of  contingency: what if one or both had lived for another decade? Would they have chosen Secession or Unionism? Would it have changed South Carolina’s fate?
Chapter 2: James Louis Petigru
        James L. Petigru was born in 1789 in Abbeville, SC, 30 miles southeast of Fort Hill. By 1819 he had been admitted to the bar, married and relocated to Charleston. He served as a major figure during the Nullification Crisis, leading the Unionist Party in the lowcountry and arguing against the test oath for state officials on the basis of its violation of South Carolina’s constitutional ban on oaths. Because of his uncompromising loyalty to his views that the U.S. Constitution stipulated that the federal government restrained state power, he was forced out from South Carolina politics in 1837. After the end of his political career, he focused on his legal clients representing elite and poor women in divorce cases against abusive husbands, free people of color and abolitionists. 
        Petigru has the most recent scholarly biographical work of the three individuals of which I intend to devote larger portions of the dissertation. His letters and papers are largely held in other family’s collections at the South Carolina Historical Society archives at the College of Charleston and at the South Caroliniana Library in Columbia but are not digitized. The Library of Congress also has some of his papers and they are available digitally. I hope to draw on these sources to build a social network of Unionism. Petigru is a lowcountry elite white man who defied the majority political principles in almost every way possible. Examining his social network as well as his worldview will be insightful in understanding Unionism throughout the lowcountry as well as the relationship between lowcountry and upstate Unionists.
Chapter 3: Benjamin Franklin Perry
        Unlike Petigru, Benjamin Perry was able to maintain and grow his political career as a Unionist in Greenville, SC. Perry was born in Pendleton, SC in 1801. Choosing to relocate to Greenville as a young man, he also built a successful legal and newspaper editor career. The collection of his papers at South Caroliniana will comprise the majority of my research and have been transcribed. His journal is digitized and I plan to use AI-enhanced OCR in order to incorporate it into my research. The most labor intensive digital piece of my work will likely be digitizing the collection of antebellum Greenville newspapers which are currently held in bound books at Bob Jones University’s archive. Once digitized, however, Perry’s editorial writing along with subscription lists and other information from the newspapers will likely greatly contribute to understanding how Perry’s experience as an upcountry Unionist varied so greatly from Petigru’s in Charleston.
Chapter 4: Non-elites: Dissenters or Confederates?
        Tracing the political activities of non-elite white Unionists through the antebellum period in order to determine the impact of their Unionism on their reaction to South Carolina’s secession will be the focus of this chapter. I am not aware of any scholarship that has done this work in South Carolina although similar studies have been conducted for Alabama, North Carolina, Virginia, Tennessee and other southern and border states.[9] Looking at this scholarship will point me toward sources allowing me to uncover the names and numbers of these people and whether they, like the elites, joined the Confederacy or elected to hide from the draft or subvert the Confederacy through other methods while remaining in South Carolina.
        This chapter will also examine the reactions of black South Carolina’s to Secession. Contrasting the small group of free African Americans in Charleston who wrote a letter expressing their support for the Confederacy and other secessionists with the majority of enslaved and free black people who supported the Union as a means of expanded democracy and liberation will complicate the experiences of black South Carolinians through the antebellum period. 
Chapter 5: Blacks Behind Union Army Lines
        Examining the movement of self-emancipating and free black Unionists in South Carolina as a result of secession positions my dissertation within the scholarship already written about the political nature and agency of enslaved people in antebellum South Carolina. Black South Carolinians who moved beyond the borders of South Carolina or behind Union Army lines are critical to understanding the effects of secession. Examining this population will also serve to broaden the definition of Unionism beyond people who were legally allowed to participate in the politics of South Carolina to include people who looked to the federal government as a potential source of freedom from bondage.
        The Port Royal experiment is a well-known and studied location of freedpeople, but I hope to find more evidence of black movement toward the Union Army as it made its way through South Carolina. I also hope to be able, whenever possible, to connect the lives of white and black Unionists to further define their social network and to understand the role of race within it.
Chapter 6: Whites Beyond South Carolina’s Borders
        This chapter will uncover white men and their families who left South Carolina rather than join the Confederate cause. Richard Current’s 98 South Carolinians serving in the Union Army’s Alabama First Cavalry unit will be a starting point to finding other men who served in the Union Army, or perhaps declined to participate in the Civil War at all. Thavolia Glymph’s The Women’s Fight may also open avenues of research into families who leave the state in order to protest the Confederacy or avoid the demands and destruction of war.[10]
Epilogue
        The epilogue will revisit my dissertation’s argument that Unionism served as South Carolina’s second party from the 1830s through 50s and that it manifested in various ways after Secession: staying, leaving, enlisting, hiding and self-emancipation. I will briefly explore how the wartime choices of Unionists impacted their post-warn political choices and Reconstruction experiences and whether Redemption ideologies can be considered as a resurrection of Unionism especially in B.F. Perry’s life. I will explore the erasure of Unionism and antebellum internal dissent in the formation of Lost Cause identity and in the literature of the South. I will further interrogate the role of memory by tracing descendants and admirers of Poinsett, Petigru and Perry and exploring how they represented their Unionists ideologies in the postbellum era. Finally, I will demonstrate how the digital component of my dissertation demonstrates the rupture of imagined geographies for South Carolinians as well as the shape and shifting of the Unionists network and the implications of its presence for South Carolina’s political history.
Timeline to Completion


Research Schedule:
Spring 2026:
* James Louis Petigru: use as subject for HIST8800 Research Seminar paper
* Joel Roberts Poinsett: research as context for Petigru and Perry and for his chapter; foil of John C. Calhoun; good positioning for the rest of the dissertation
Summer 2026:
* Explore local and state archives to build a database to outline the following:
   * Unionists who stay in South Carolina after Secession
      * Track military service: Do they stay as dissenters or Confederates?
      * Are there negative ramifications for their antebellum Unionism?
   * White Unionists who leave South Carolina
      * Start with Robert N. Current’s 98 South Carolinians that served in the First Alabama Cavalry (Union)
      * Investigate other Union units that South Carolinians may have served in. Is there a possibility of naval service because of proximity to federally occupied coastal forts?
      * Investigate South Carolina POWs recruited for Union Army
      * What about families that leave South Carolina? Look for letters to/from family members.
   * Black Unionists
      * May not actually leave South Carolina: reframe state boundaries due to Union Army movement/occupation
      * Self-emancipating black South Carolinians chose Unionism through flight: political activism


Digital Project Schedule:
Fall 2025:
* B.F. Perry Letters Project completed for HIST8550 Digital Seminar project
   * Project examines the corpus of Benjamin F. Perry’s letters at South Caroliniana Library
   * “Worldview Mapping” visualization supports argument that Perry was not a hyperlocally minded parochial politician, but rather a cosmopolitan globally conscious citizen making political decisions he believed to be in the best interest of South Carolina as a global, not merely southern, political entity
   * Named Entity Recognition (NER) used to locate people and location entities in Benjamin and Elizabeth’s letters; this methodology could be used to begin to form a social network of Unionism in South Carolina
Spring 2026:
* Social Network of Unionism
   * Build SQL database and research tools for Unionism social network
   * Add person entities from B.F. Perry’s letters
   * Locate and add James Petigru’s person entities
Summer 2026:
* Add Unionists who stay and leave South Carolina to database and visualizations as located in research phase


Written Draft Submission Schedule:


August 1, 2026
	Poinsett Chapter Draft Submitted
	August 15, 2026
	Petigru Chapter Draft Submitted
	September 1, 2026
	Perry Chapter Draft Submitted
	October 1, 2026
	Unionists Who Stay Chapter Draft Submitted
	November 1, 2026
	White Unionists Who Leave Chapter Draft Submitted
	December 1, 2026
	Black Unionists Chapter Draft Submitted
	January 1, 2027
	Introduction and Epilogue Drafts Submitted
	February 1, 2027
	Full Draft to Committee for review
	

Digital Component


For each of the individuals and groups featured in the dissertation a set of digital research tools will be created. While the methodologies employed may vary for each group, I anticipate that the overarching digital component linking each of the chapters will be a social network. The ability to see the connections between people who chose to remain Unionists between Nullification and Secession will be highly instructive to my argument. It may yield results that shape my thesis into a more traditional narrative regarding the parochialism of Unionism, although I suspect (and hope) that it will in fact greatly expand the depth and breadth of Unionism’s reach beyond what exists in the current literature. A social network of Unionism stretching possibly as early as the early republic era into the Civil War will also allow me to visualize the results of secession on the network.
I believe that mapping will also play a central role in my digital research. The ability to locate the origin of individuals and families that stay as compared to those who left should yield interesting insights as well as where those who left eventually settled. Do they go north? Do they go west? Do their families eventually come back to South Carolina? A key component of the mapping will be the movement of the Union Army into South Carolina through the Civil War years and the political action of movement by self-emancipating black South Carolinians. Mapping the flow of communication and information between the Unionists - both within South Carolina and outside - will also be a valuable visualization. Information path studies and visualizations have precedence both in traditional and digital histories and serve to explain the transfer of ideologies.[11] It may be especially illuminating to understand why it seems that the midlands of South Carolina are almost totally unaffected by Unionism, choosing to always side with Disunionists.
References


Primary Sources:


Perry, Benjamin Franklin. B.F. Perry Papers: 24 Jan. 1737 - 10 Feb. 1910, n.d., 1760 Sept.-1981 Oct., n.d. South Caroliniana Library, University of South Carolina, Columbia, S.C.


Petigru, James Louis. “James Louis Petigru Papers, 1816-1863.” Vanderhorst Family Collection. South Carolina Historical Society Archives, College of Charleston, Charleston, S.C.


Petigru, James Louis. “James L. Petigru Letters, 1848.” (43/252) South Carolina Historical Society Archives, College of Charleston, Charleston, S.C.


Secondary Sources:


Ayers, Edward L. The Thin Light of Freedom : The Civil War and Emancipation in the Heart of America. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2017.


Baggett, James Alex. The Scalawags : Southern Dissenters in the Civil War and Reconstruction. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004.


Burton, Orville Vernon. In My Father’s House Are Many Mansions : Family and Community in Edgefield, South Carolina. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1985.


Campbell, Jacqueline Glass. When Sherman Marched North from the Sea : Resistance on the Confederate Home Front. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003.


Cashin, Joan E.., Blair, William., Kenzer, Robert C.. The War Was You and Me: Civilians in the American Civil War. United States: Princeton University Press, 2020.


Cobb, James C. Away Down South: A History of Southern Identity. New York ; Oxford University Press, 2023.


Crofts, Daniel W. Reluctant Confederates : Upper South Unionists in the Secession Crisis. Chapel Hills ; University of North Carolina Press, 1989.


Current, Richard Nelson. Lincoln’s Loyalists : Union Soldiers from the Confederacy. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1992.


Edgar, Walter B. South Carolina : A History. Columbia, S.C: University of South Carolina Press, 1998.


Ericson, David F. Slavery in the American Republic : Developing the Federal Government, 1791-1861. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2011.


Faust, Drew Gilpin. The Creation of Confederate Nationalism : Ideology and Identity in the Civil War South. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1988.


Fields-Black, Edda L. Combee : Harriet Tubman, the Combahee River Raid, and Black Freedom during the Civil War. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2024.


Ford Jr., Lacy K. Origins of Southern Radicalism : The South Carolina Upcountry, 1800-1860. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.


Freehling, William W. Prelude to Civil War : The Nullification Controversy in South Carolina, 1816-1836. New York : Oxford University Press, 1965.


Freehling, William W. The Road to Disunion. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.


Glymph, Thavolia. The Women’s Fight : The Civil War’s Battles for Home, Freedom, and Nation. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2020.


Grayson, William J. James Louis Petigru. A Biographical Sketch. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1866.


Howe, Daniel Walker. What Hath God Wrought : The Transformation of America, 1815-1848. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.


Huff, Archie Vernon. Greenville : The History of the City and County in the South Carolina Piedmont. Columbia, S.C: University of South Carolina Press, 1995.


Janney, Caroline E. Remembering the Civil War : Reunion and the Limits of Reconciliation. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2013.


Kilbride, Daniel. An American Aristocracy : Southern Planters in Antebellum Philadelphia. Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press, 2006.


Kilbride, Daniel. Being American in Europe, 1750-1860. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013.


Lee, J. Edward, and Ron Chepesiuk. South Carolina in the Civil War : The Confederate Experience in Letters and Diaries. Jefferson, N.C: McFarland, 2000.


Majewski, John D. Modernizing a Slave Economy : The Economic Vision of the Confederate Nation. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009.


Mathisen, Erik. The Loyal Republic : Traitors, Slaves, and the Remaking of Citizenship in Civil War America. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2018.


McCurry, Stephanie. Confederate Reckoning : Power and Politics in the Civil War South. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 2010.


McPherson, James M. Battle Cry of Freedom : The Civil War Era. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.


McRae, Bennie J, Curtis M Miller, and Cheryl Trowbridge-Miller. Nineteenth Century Freedom Fighters : The 1st South Carolina Volunteers. Charleston, South Carolina: Arcadia Publishing, 2006.


Neumann, Brian C. Bloody Flag of Anarchy: Unionism in South Carolina during the Nullification Crisis. Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2022.


Oakes, James. Freedom National : The Destruction of Slavery in the United States, 1861-1865. 1st ed. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2013.


Pease, William H., and Jane H. Pease. James Louis Petigru: Southern Conservative, Southern Dissenter. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1995.


Petigru, James Louis, and James Petigru Carson. Life, Letters and Speeches of James Louis Petigru, the Union Man of South Carolina. Washington, D.C: W.H. Lowdermilk & Co., 1920.


Poole, W. Scott. Never Surrender : Confederate Memory and Conservatism in the South Carolina Upcountry. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2004.


Racine, Philip N. Living a Big War in a Small Place : Spartanburg, South Carolina, during the Confederacy. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 2013.


Schoen, Brian. The Fragile Fabric of Union : Cotton, Federal Politics, and the Global Origins of the Civil War. Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2009.


Sinha, Manisha. The Counterrevolution of Slavery : Politics and Ideology in Antebellum South Carolina. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000.


Sinha, Manisha. The Slave’s Cause : A History of Abolition. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 2016.


Spady, James O’Neil, and Manisha Sinha. Fugitive Movements : Commemorating the Denmark Vesey Affair and Black Radical Antislavery in the Atlantic World. Columbia, South Carolina: University of South Carolina Press, 2022.


Storey, Margaret M. Loyalty and Loss : Alabama’s Unionists in the Civil War and Reconstruction. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004.


Tatum, Georgia Lee. Disloyalty in the Confederacy. Place of publication not identified: Pickel Partners Publishing, 2016.


Taylor, Amy Murrell. Embattled Freedom : Journeys through the Civil War’s Slave Refugee Camps. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2018.


Varon, Elizabeth R. Disunion! : The Coming of the American Civil War, 1789-1859.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2008.


West, Stephen A. 2008. From Yeoman to Redneck in the South Carolina Upcountry, 1850-1915. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.


West, Stephen A. “Minute Men, Yeomen, and the Mobilization for Secession in the South Carolina Upcountry.” The Journal of Southern History 71, no. 1 (2005): 75–104. http://www.jstor.org/stable/27648652.


Williams, George Washington, and John David Smith. A History of the Negro Troops in the War of the Rebellion, 1861-1865 : Preceded by a Review of the Military Services of Negroes in Ancient and Modern Times. New York: Fordham University Press, 2012. https://doi.org/10.1515/9780823240425.


Woods, Michael E. Arguing until Doomsday : Stephen Douglas, Jefferson Davis, and the Struggle for American Democracy. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2021.


Wyatt-Brown, Bertram. Southern Honor : Ethics and Behavior in the Old South. 25th Anniversary Ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2023.




________________
[1] John C. Calhoun, The Works of John C. Calhoun, Edited by Richard K. Crallé (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1854), 633.
[2] Manisha Sinha, The Counterrevolution of Slavery : Politics and Ideology in Antebellum South Carolina (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000).
[3] Walter B. Edgar, South Carolina : A History (Columbia, S.C: University of South Carolina Press, 1998).
[4] Lacy K. Ford, Jr., Origins of Southern Radicalism : The South Carolina Upcountry, 1800-1860 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).
[5] Stephen A. West, “Minute Men, Yeomen, and the Mobilization for Secession in the South Carolina Upcountry” (The Journal of Southern History 71, no. 1 (2005): 75–104), http://www.jstor.org/stable/27648652.
[6] William W. Freehling, Prelude to Civil War : The Nullification Controversy in South Carolina, 1816-1836 (New York : Oxford University Press, 1992); Richard E. Ellis, The Union at Risk : Jacksonian Democracy, States’ Rights, and the Nullification Crisis (New York, New York ; Oxford University Press, 1987); John Barnwell, Love of Order : South Carolina’s First Secession Crisis (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1982).


[7] Brian Neumann, Bloody Flag of Anarchy : Unionism in South Carolina during the Nullification Crisis (Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Louisiana State University Press, 2022).
[8] Richard Nelson Current, Lincoln’s Loyalists : Union Soldiers from the Confederacy (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1992).
[9] Margaret M. Storey, Loyalty and Loss : Alabama’s Unionists in the Civil War and Reconstruction (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004); Daniel W. Crofts, Reluctant Confederates : Upper South Unionists in the Secession Crisis (Chapel Hills ; University of North Carolina Press, 1989).
[10] Current, Lincoln’s Loyalists; Thavolia Glymph, The Women’s Fight : The Civil War’s Battles for Home, Freedom, and Nation (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2020).
[11]  Cameron Blevins, “Space, Nation, and the Triumph of Region: A View of the World from Houston.” The Journal of American History (Bloomington, Ind. 101, no. 1, 2014): 122–47. https://doi.org/10.1093/jahist/jau184; Paper Trails: The US Post and the Making of the American West (New York: Oxford University Press, 2021); Julius Sherrard Scott, The Common Wind : Afro-American Currents in the Age of the Haitian Revolution (London ; Verso, 2018).